Thank you.
Hi, everybody.
Welcome to The Book Guys.
From Washington, D.C., in the studios of WAMU-FM, I'm Mike Cuthbert, along with Alan Stipek, the founder, president, and chief major-domo of Second Story Books, one of the largest bookstores in the Washington area, dealing in used books.
And we're doing our thing with you, as usual.
Our phone number is 1-800-828-BOOK.
You call that number, and we get you on the air.
Talking about used books, rare books,
And as we head into the officially now, into the holiday season, Alan, first of all, good to see you again.
Hello.
As we head into the holiday season, it seems like the world is breaking out in book fairs.
You can't open a book magazine or anything else without seeing a book fair someplace around the country.
There are generally two kinds, it seems.
There's the book fair, and then there's the international book fair.
What's the difference?
One is out of the country, the one is in the United States.
But there's international fairs in the United States.
What does that mean?
Okay.
What is happening is about two and a half years ago, book fairs exploded.
There used to be one or two book fairs every week or every month.
Now there's two or three book fairs every week.
year-round.
You literally could be in two cities every week of the year.
Now, there are international book fairs.
I'm a member of the ABAA, and we have five book fairs annually in the United States.
We call them international book fairs because we are the American chapter of the ILAB, the International League of Antiquarian Booksellers.
And we have our
compatriots in other countries come and participate in our book fairs as we do with them in their country.
So if you have an international book fair, let's say the Washington International Book Fair, what happens if no foreign dealers come?
Is it still an international book fair?
Well, we'll make one come over.
We'll either pay their way, but we'll make sure we have one.
We won't call it a bribe.
Let's say it's an enhancement.
Let's be honest.
Because people go to book fairs and they think they're seeing used books, they might get a deal.
If you're shopping for Christmas presents, is a used book fair the best place to get a real bargain?
Well, if we're talking a used fair versus a rare book fair, you might be better off going to a local book fair, which generally just has booksellers from that specific area.
When you go to one of the larger Enneagram book fairs, an ABA book fair, the chance of getting something which is mispriced is slim and none because these are the professionals in the field.
and they're going to be very conscious.
They're going to get some very good books, and you might get books which we'll appreciate, but it's going to be very rare when you're going to get a real mistake.
If you're going specifically to book fairs to find the mistake, I suggest you go around the country to the local book fairs.
If you can afford the travel expenses and you really like the world of book selling, these are the areas to go to.
There's at least, and I'm not exaggerating, there's two book fairs every week in some part of the country.
Our number is 1-800-828-BOOK.
When you call that toll-free number, be sure you have your book with you so you can describe the author, the title, the publisher, and the year in which it was published.
It helps us figure out which book you're talking about.
That's 1-800-828-BOOK.
That's the number that Arthur called, and Arthur's our first caller of the day.
Arthur, welcome to the book, guys.
Thank you.
What have you got for us?
Well, I've got two books, the same book.
And it's For Whom the Bell Tolls by Ernest Hemingway, published by Scribner in 1940.
One of them was mine originally, and the other one I picked up, I think, at a church book, not a church book fair, but a church fair.
And I've been told that there's a difference in them.
The jacket, incidentally, on either one is in very good shape.
But one of them, and I don't remember who told me this,
was that one is better than the other because the photograph of Hemingway on the back of the dust jacket is not credited by the photographer.
And the other one is credited.
That's correct.
One of them on the copyright page has a small A underneath the credit line.
And that's the only difference that I can see in them.
And if this was pointed out to me, I wouldn't have even noticed it, I guess, if it hadn't been.
But I'm just curious about what all this is about.
Okay, let's go from the best to the least.
Okay, For Whom the Bell Tolls was published by Scribner's in 1940.
All books published by Scribner's after 1929 must have an A on the verso of the copyright page.
What's the verso?
The other side of the title to indicate a first edition.
Now, books prior to that that were issued by Scribner sometimes would have to be weighed.
I think The Sun Also Rises by Hemingway, the way you can tell at first, if it's 15 and a half ounces versus 15 ounces, which is a problem for booksellers when they're in the field.
They've got to carry a small weight with them, you know, a scale with them to weigh the book out.
But as far as For Whom the Bell Tolls, the first edition is Scribner's 1940 with the A.
To make it the best you can have, you have to have a perfect dust jacket.
The dust jacket cannot have the credit of the photographer on the back.
So you need an A for a first and no credit on the back for it to be a true first wrapper.
Now, excuse me, there's an obvious technique here.
Arthur takes the A volume and the photograph of Hemingway without the author and matches them up.
That's called mating.
Yeah.
Okay.
That's legitimate?
That's mating a book.
I mean...
I mean, if you lose sleep, but quite frankly, that's done all the time in book collecting.
Booksellers and book collectors will collect a book to add to their collection, and they'll buy it at any level they can.
at that specific time, and what they'll do is if the dust wrapper is in poor condition, they'll look to buy a better dust wrapper.
The greatest example is the Great Gatsby.
A first edition of Great Gatsby sells for, quite frankly, a perfect jacket for about $25,000.
The book is worth $1,000.
The jacket is worth $24,000.
And if you want to get a perfect copy and you don't have a perfect jacket, you certainly are going to look for the better jacket.
And I've seen jackets sell on their own, no exaggeration, for $20,000 without the book.
That's an interesting purchase.
I mean, we've sold jackets to booksellers who specialize in feels when we've had, like, Agatha Christie jackets without the book that they wanted to put on a good copy without a jacket.
Wow.
In this case, For Whom the Bell Tolls, in good condition, or meaning good, I say very good to fine, would be worth about $300 a first in jacket.
Then it would go down the ladder.
A book, a reading copy, a non-first edition with the later jacket, a book club jacket, would be worth about $15 max.
There is a great disparity between the first and the subsequent editions.
But you wouldn't be the first person on earth to...
We lost him.
Yeah.
Whoever, Arthur, wherever he went, he wouldn't be the first person on earth to take the jacket and put it on a first.
For Arthur, the bell just told.
Told.
No question.
Sorry about that, Arthur.
You bring up the dust jacket.
Why is a dust jacket so important to us now?
Why is it so important?
Because it is the original form the book was issued in.
And unfortunately...
For a lot of people who have had books, they've taken the dust wrapper and they've let it deteriorate, and they haven't realized that because of the fragile aspect of the jacket, it has taken the book from its original format and lowered it.
That's what makes dust jackets so important.
Now, dust jackets are relatively new.
They've only been around for about 100 years.
And during the early, during the, let's say, the flapper years when book novels became very popular, especially F. Scott Fitzgerald, the jackets were very important because the art on the jackets were, in fact, their own part of the book.
They influenced the purchase of the book, and they were the image what the person wanted, the author wanted the book to represent.
And a dust wrapper artist worth a lot of money.
Fascinating.
In fact, we'll get into in future programs something that's very scary happening in dust jackets, and that's color Xerox copies.
Oh, no question.
We'll talk about that later.
For Whom the Bell Tolls is one of them.
Yeah, exactly.
Let's go to Charleston, South Carolina.
Jane, you're on with the book, guys.
What have you got for us?
Well, I have no dust jackets, for sure.
I have a two-volume of the sketchbook of Jeffrey Crayon.
No kidding.
But it never, in the entire book, tells one who wrote it.
Washington Irving.
I know who wrote it, but why don't they tell me that?
Well, because...
Well, actually, this was Washington Irving when he used the pseudonym of Jeffrey Crayon and didn't want anybody to know for a variety of reasons.
One, I believe, is because he didn't want the royalties to go to his own name.
He wanted to have the royalties somewhere else.
Others had to do with the fact that he published in Europe, in England, before he published in the United States.
And being a very famous American author, this had to do, again, with getting paid for the book.
He had another bank account in England.
It all has to do with money then.
Some of it has to do with money.
Even then.
Even then, Jane.
Oh, my.
Are they worth anything, do you suppose?
The first edition of the sketchbook?
I don't know if it's the first edition or not.
It says London, John Murray, Albemarle Street, 1823.
Well, there's a good chance it is.
If you want to do some vamping music for me, I can look it up.
But that's about the right time for that book.
Let's say, and I'm not sure if it is or not, it was a first, that book would sell, is it an original board or an original cloth?
I don't know.
It looks like it.
The outside is the same as the inside of the cover, you know, that beautiful kind of watery thing.
Oh, the kind of watery thing.
Let's see, what are we thinking?
What are we thinking?
We're thinking...
Watermarks, marbleized paper.
Yes, marbleized paper.
Are the covers leather-bound or are they cloth-bound?
Leather-bound.
Okay.
Generally, first editions of Washington Irving or Godfrey Crayon were issued in cloth bindings, generally black or brown boards.
Subsequent editions were done in leather, again, to make a deluxe edition.
But to have a true first edition of Irving, you will find them in these very hard brown boards with, oh, how would I describe it?
A kind of like paste down on the spine, a kind of buckram cloth, which would be fastened onto the boards.
Yeah, that is not fit.
No.
But, I mean, the leather enhances specific editions, and I would imagine if you had a true first, I would price that book somewhere in the vicinity of $300 to $400.
Uh-huh.
But this is not fact.
Okay.
Thank you very much.
Well, thank you.
Thanks very much.
Bye.
From Charleston, we go to Duxbury, Massachusetts, and John,
welcome to the book guys hello hi there fine how are you very good very interesting program thank you well i think this is really gonna really gonna go good uh i have two volumes uh call of a book called wilson's tales of the borders in the scotland i don't have a date on it it's a large book old-fashioned with a marbleized cover and a buckram spine it was printed by adam and company
Paternostro in London, Gatehead on Time.
It's a very large book, very old, and it's not the kind people like today, but it's most interesting to anybody's Scottish ancestry.
Right.
Is it the actual title Wilson's Borderlands?
Wilson's Tales of the Border.
There's a variety of editions.
You don't have an exact date on that, right?
There is no date.
I can't find either of the copies.
It was probably published somewhere between about 1840 and 1875.
It feels that old.
It feels that old?
What's it smell like?
It smells about that old.
It smells very good.
It smells like...
Sometimes I smell that all.
Well, no, actually, the reason I say that is because, I mean, a professional nose could smell the difference between an 18th century... Come on now.
I'm serious.
Oh, quite true.
Yeah, between 18th century and 17th century paper in the ink.
This ink I can smell is early 18th century.
That's right.
I mean...
Can you take the month of the year by any chance?
I beg your pardon?
Can you get the month of the year?
No, I can't.
But I can tell you what distillery it came from.
From where, sir?
At any rate, that's the book.
There are large books.
It was given to me as a gift many years ago.
Full leather binding?
Full leather binding.
Right.
And two volumes?
Two volumes.
Extra illustrated by any chance?
All illustrated.
Illustrated in sort of an antique lithograph.
Two-color.
Okay.
In an antique lithograph?
Well, I would say that they're... Is it hand-colored by any chance?
No, they're not colored.
They're two-color.
Well, they're two-toned.
So that could be a steel engraving by some chance?
Does it look like an engraving?
I happen to be an artist.
I'll tell you, some are...
engravings, but the others look to me like lithographs.
Look like lithographs.
They're taken off a stone.
Well, then probably that's later than 1870, because 1850 is about the time that photo reproduction of lithographs came into existence.
And so the fact that it looks like it's a lithograph, but it's a reproduction, I would imagine that book is probably later than 1860, 1865.
which makes it a later edition, and I would guesstimate that without seeing the book, it would be worth anywhere between $75 to $150 for this sale.
Well, it's a great book, and I was most interested in your comments in any case.
John, thank you very much.
Fascinating.
My pleasure.
It's fascinating to listen to you too, Matt.
Thank you very much.
Bye-bye.
We'll talk more about the value of woodcuts, illustrations, lithographs, and all that to books that you might think are supposed to be most valuable just for their printing as the book guys continue.
We're the book guys.
We're the Book Guys in Washington.
I'm Mike Cuthbert along with Alan Stipek as we take a look at your used books.
Our number is 1-800-828-BOOK.
All your questions will be answered there, and that's how you get on this radio program to be heard around the country.
All you have to have is the author, the title, the publisher, and hopefully the year, though sometimes that's difficult.
As you just heard Alan do, if we don't have a date of publication, he'll try to track it down for you from some other evidence.
We were talking about lithographs, woodcuts and all the rest.
What value are they, particularly when the book is supposed to be famous because it's, let's say, a novel by Dickens or anyone else?
What is the importance of the art in those books?
Oh, it's highly important, depending on...
The book itself, I mean, a wonderful example is the Limited Editions Club comes out with a book.
It started in 1929, and every other month they illustrated, they issued a classic with a special illustration.
And the two greatest books in that series are the Lissistrata by Aristophanes, illustrated by Pablo Picasso, which now sells for about $3,000.
And the Matisse Illustrated Ulysses, signed by both Matisse and James Joyce, which sells for about $8,000.
So obviously, if you didn't have the Matisse Illustrations in that Ulysses, you wouldn't have an $8,000 book.
All right.
Let's go to Cincinnati.
Hazel, you're on with the book, guys.
Welcome to you.
Good evening.
Hi.
What have you got for us?
Well, mostly children's books.
Okay.
I just wondered if there was any value in those.
Children's books are a wonderful, wonderful area to collect.
The only unfortunate thing about collecting children's books is that you can't let your children look at them.
No, no.
Because they're not allowed to touch them.
I have two daughters who probably have 3,000 books in their library at this point, of which maybe five are collectible because I can't allow them at their age to actually handle the books.
Well, as a matter of fact, Hazel, there's a book out.
In fact, we're going to hear from the author of it, Nick Basbanes, a little bit later.
He talks about a woman down in Florida who was perhaps the most famous collector of children's books in the world.
She headed the library where they were stored.
She would not allow children to even touch the books that she had.
So, so much for children's books.
But what do you have in your library you'd like to check out?
Well, I have one book, which is poems to be memorized and studied.
It gives the poems that each grade they would need to learn.
Now, is that a textbook?
It's more like a textbook, yes.
And when was it published, ma'am?
19... 1925.
And is it illustrated?
No.
And who is it published by?
It's published by...
Lincoln School Supply Company?
That's a textbook.
Okay.
Okay, that is not, of all the world of children's books, that's probably one of the only ones that really doesn't have any market value.
Is that a polite way of saying it?
That's a polite way of saying it, but it's fun to read it.
Oh, no question.
To see what...
children were expected to memorize.
You know, the interesting thing about children's books, if you go back to school primers and the early chapbooks, you'll find that the earlier books are worth some money because they're the first books that were used in schools.
But at school, Texas, you know,
evolved, those books actually are of no value, and the books that are of value are the ones which were extra illustrated or are in some way enhanced by bindings.
And it seems kind of disproportionate that the books which were most important for children look to be not collectible.
Like the ones Hazel's talking about.
Exactly, and the ones that are collectible are the books that you wouldn't allow your child to look at.
Or you had to do under supervision.
Did you have another one, Hazel?
I also have Little Red Riding Hood, and this is illustrated.
And it's published in, I had the page a moment ago, 1921.
Mm-hmm.
by Donahue and Company.
Right.
That unfortunately is a reprint house.
Winston, Donahue, Grasset and Dunlap are all reprint houses.
Hearst, that took children's classics and made, and I hate to use the expression again, poor man's or cheap editions.
Okay.
And that is exactly what that is.
There are some wonderful Little Red Riding Hood books that are of value.
You could go back to...
the early forms of lithography, and you'll find children's books that just the lithographs alone are worth about $50 a page.
And I like to say there are a lot of children's book illustrators out there that are so collectible that you're talking in the hundreds of thousands of dollars.
I mean, Arthur Rackham, Edmund Duloc, or Willie Pagani, just names I'll throw out, but there's hundreds of them.
Hazel, thanks for your call.
We really appreciate it.
Okay.
Thank you, now.
We're the book guys at 1-800-828-BOOK.
I was fascinated to find the other day that one of the more collectible books recently has been Raggedy Ann and Andy, which is coming back.
I found out it was also for Johnny Gruul's originals, but also the plates.
In fact, we want to talk about that after the break coming up a little bit.
The value of breaking books and just taking the plates out of them, I know you've got some strong feelings about that, and we'll find out what they are.
I'm talking to Alan Stipek, I'm Mike Cuthbert, and we're the book guys in Washington.
Alan, let's talk about what we got a second.
What is your feeling about breaking of books?
What's my feeling about it?
Yeah.
I think it's a felony.
Okay.
I quite frankly think there is no place for breaking books.
If you have a book, the integrity of the book should be maintained.
If a book was so destroyed and so disrepaired that the only thing that was obtainable out of it was the plates, then I could possibly agree that you should at least frame those.
But nobody should ever extract a plate out of a book if the book is intact.
I mean, that's not what the book was issued for.
Fair enough.
Yeah.
Let's go to Susan.
You're on with the book, guys.
How are you?
Hello, Susan.
Oh, yes.
Fine, thanks.
It's your turn.
I'm calling to... I don't have all the information I'm supposed to have to ask the question I have, but I have an old book that was given to me by my father and passed down to him by his mother.
It's a volume of all of Shakespeare's plays, and...
according to the little note in the book, was brought over by my grandmother's father in 1848 from England.
The Shakespeare on the front of the book is spelled S-H-A-K-S-P-E-R-E, not the spelling we learn in college these days.
And the type is probably about six points.
The book is in terrible shape.
The questions I really have are,
And the book has enormous value to me just because I remember my grandmother reading this.
She remembers her own father reading it.
And she knew Shakespeare and loved Shakespeare so well.
So my question, I would like to know how I might find out something about the history of this book's printing, since it would have been printed sometime later.
presumably in the 19th century, and how I might preserve it.
Okay.
Well, question one is, who's the printer or the publisher on the title page?
The really pathetic thing is the title page is missing.
There's no colophon.
Okay.
It's probably, and I don't say this to detract from the value of the book,
Shakespeare is probably the most published or printed book other than the Bible and the history of the world.
The chance of it being a very early Shakespeare would be indicated by the paper.
I mean, if you say it was handed down from your grandmother and you know it's at least as early as 1845, you've still got about another 200 years.
before you're going all the way down to the folios.
I'm just going to say that if it's just a regular reading copy, it's of no monetary value for resale.
But from a personal perspective, to get it preserved, I highly agree that it should be maintained.
And it is not...
advantageous generally to rebound books for value because it usually detracts unless you're trying to protect the interior of the book.
But in this case, because of your desire to maintain the keepsake, I would say go with whatever you want to do with it.
I mean, it's not a question of money is no object, but you can make any kind of binding you want, and the book is more important to you because it's a family heirloom.
Is there a binding on it now, Susan?
There is a front and a cover but the spine is missing.
Right.
Is it leather bound or is it cloth?
Leather.
Yeah.
Can you tell what kind of leather it is?
You mean the color or, I mean, it's reddish?
It's reddish.
Reddish would probably be later.
I mean, if there was a certain kind of, if the binding had different coloration, I might say it could be earlier, but a red leather binding usually doesn't start until about 1770.
Well, and the engravings in it look like lithography.
They don't look very early to me.
Well, lithography or photo reproduction?
I would say they look like engravings, right?
Is that lithography?
No.
Well, lithography on stone engravings is different.
I would say you probably have an early 1800s.
Hang on just a second.
We'll settle this in just a minute as we remind our listeners we're the Book Guys in Washington.
We have dealt with Susan's Shakespeare.
Who does rebinding?
Where would she take it?
There are book binders all around the country.
I think depending on where you're calling from, I would just get in touch with a local chamber of commerce or look on the Yellow Pages or contact a local library or a museum and see who does their rebinding work.
And that would be your best bet.
Where are you calling from?
Washington.
Check the Yellow Pages.
I mean, there's four or five binders in the area.
One of the problems about good binders are they're backed up for years.
And, you know, sometimes they don't have the time to, you know, not because they don't want to, but they have previous responsibilities.
I would just check binders in the Washington area and see what they suggest and bring the book on it.
You can also have a box made or something.
Oh, sure.
You can have clamshell boxes, cylinder boxes.
You can have slip cases, a variety of ways to do it.
And each of them could be special on your own right.
I mean, one of the nicest things about book collecting is that you can actually create a protective box according to whatever you want to do.
And I mean, if you went down and studied just the bindings, especially the French bindings from the 1920s, and saw what they did with the clam boxes, with the clam shake boxes, it is incredible.
Those are works of art.
And those works of art sell for thousands of dollars.
I mean, you could design your own box if you wanted.
Put a picture of your grandmother on it.
I mean, seriously, I'm not saying that to be facetious.
No, I was thinking the same thing.
Yeah, I mean, you could do it, I mean, just off the top of my head, you could do little miniatures and actually paint them.
I mean, that's not an, you know, it's something that would be wonderful.
So you've got something to make, Susan.
Thanks for your call.
Thanks a lot.
Thank you.
Bye-bye.
As we talked to you last week, we're going to be joined every week by Nicholas Basbanes.
Nick is the author of A Gentle Madness, about book collecting, a lot of the people that we're talking with and about tonight.
And as we join Nick tonight on Mars, he sounds like he's shaving again.
We're going to hear the story tonight, I understand, Nick, of Nicholas Basbanes meets Michael Crichton.
Tell us all about it.
Michael Crichton, of course, I've interviewed...
about four times over the years for Jurassic Park, a couple books prior to that.
But in September, when his new book, his new novel, The Lost World, which is the sequel to Jurassic Park, was published, I went down to Long Island where he was visiting his old high school, Roslyn High School.
To make a long story short, he was visiting with the students.
They mobbed him.
They all had copies of his book, which they asked to sign.
We have to realize that this book was
issued in the first printing of perhaps a half a million or 600,000 copies.
Not a scarce book, perhaps a collectible book.
But while he was there, they put up these little posters on the wall.
Michael Crichton, welcome back to RHS, and it showed his little high school photograph.
I took one of these off the wall, and as Michael was walking back out to his limo, I was walking with him, and I said, Michael, will you sign this for me?
He looked at me and said, Nick, you son of a gun.
I said, how many others have signed this thing today?
He said, this is the only one.
I don't know what the value of this thing is, but if there are half a million copies of The Lost World and only one signed copy of this poster, welcome back to RHS, dated on the day he was there.
You know, this is a little piece of ephemera, but I think it's the kind of thing that collectors can look for, and if they see the opportunity to see something like that,
Boy, go for it.
Let me ask a question, Nick.
After you realized he hadn't signed any others, did you go back and rip up all the other ones on the wall?
No, actually, I ran to my car.
I don't want anybody to see what I had.
Actually, that's one of the greatest things about collecting is the oddity, the ephemeral oddity, which becomes the most desirable of any collector.
I mean, there are so many authors, and you know that, Nick, that the scarcest piece is the one in five that was written while they were in college.
Exactly.
I did a mimeographed copy of something Ken Follett wrote in college, and I had him sign it for me, and he asked me, what's it worth?
I said, now it's worth $2,000.
And he looked at me, and he said the same thing, you son of a gun.
Oh, good thinking.
Nick, thanks very much for joining us tonight.
Gentlemen, good luck.
Thanks, Nick.
Bye-bye.
Nick Bazbaines, author of A Gentle Madness, published by Henry Holt.
We're going to be talking about ephemera, but also about a set of presidential papers upcoming as the Book Guys continue.
And we're the Book Guys.